this is the second video in an ongoing
series that fundamentally reflects on my
background as a video game journalist
and I was a video game journalist during
the crucial years when this company Sega
really lost its way and fell apart this
video is inevitably gonna have less of
an upbeat and colorful and fun tone than
the first video that was talking about
the n64 because we're talking about
failure and we're talking about failure
of a huge company that was a huge part
of my childhood and if you're watching
this video quite likely your childhood
as well
Sega now look this video is not gonna
have a whole lot of props you guys will
know right away this is not a real Sega
Genesis this is this is from the current
Sega corporation but this is the reissue
HDMI Genesis replacement which I'll
probably do a separate video talking
about this in head can head-to-head
comparison with the Super Nintendo mini
another HDMI 16-bit reissue I do not
have with me now a Sega Saturn um but
the point is if you didn't see the first
video I was actually employed as a video
game journalist at the time when the
Sega Saturn and the Nintendo 64 and the
PlayStation 1 were directly competing
with one another and I'm not
exaggerating at all
my importance or significance as a
journalist I was a zero importance
absolutely zero but what you have to
understand is at that time the industry
was much more generous and open and
forthcoming so a dumb teenager like
myself who happened to get a job writing
video game reviews would get invited to
the Sega corporate headquarters would
get invited to be given a tour of sega
city would get some level of inside
information and promotion from sega
would get given a Sega Saturn and the
the forthcoming games and so on and so
forth I think so that was maybe 1995
we're talking about and today by
contrast you know everything is done
over the internet if you're not writing
video game reviews for the New York
Times I don't think you get this level
of just real world face-to-face Enter
action with these companies and you
probably don't get that level of
tangible gifts in suasion providing you
from the companies of course one of the
reasons they did that was back then
there was no option for journalists to
just download these games or something
like that so it was done much more in a
face-to-face handshake basis the way the
whole industry worked so my analysis of
why Sega declined and fell and failed
falls under two categories two headings
and the first is part of a kind of
mainstream analysis that I know other
YouTube channels have discussed and
other websites have discussed in print
and other articles have been written on
it and the second I think I I have never
seen anyone discussed before and I
googled around a bit before making this
video and I couldn't find anyone
discussing it before so it's an original
idea to that extent uh the first one I
want to point out is this what was the
fundamental difference between Sega and
Nintendo when they made their their
transition from the success of their
16-bit era to the failure of their
32-bit era the transition from Sega
Genesis which was a big success to the
Sega Saturn Sega Saturn was not just
less successful but is in many ways the
start at the end of the company say no
more
it is the same difference between Sega
and Sony and that exists between Sega
and Microsoft on as deep a level as is
humanly possible the corporate entity
that was Sega was created for arcade
games it's even in the name of the
company service games where they came
from what they did and not just their
business model but their creative model
and mentality about what a game was
supposed to be and how it would reach
the public and then be adapted to appear
on a console was all utterly built
around the arcade game experience was
that true of Sony no not at all Sony was
a company and their corporate model in
their creative process was built around
making a stereo
stereo system that sits in your in your
living room Sony's idea of what they did
was great a TV set or a stereo or this
kind of equipment that was sitting your
living room then they looked at video
game systems in video game software as
another kind of equipment they were
gonna furnish you with really we like
the furniture business a living room
furniture if that happens to light up
and make noises um
and Microsoft again coming out of a
different kind of corporate culture and
background making computers making
operating systems making word processors
and then stepping into video game
hardware and video game software from
that background Sega's mentality was
totally different so in this period like
1995 through 1998 with the launch of the
Saturn and then Nintendo 64 emerging and
you know that the decline and fall of
the Saturn what was most absurd was that
all over the world Sega was actively
building and expanding what were
normally called Sega City arcades they
were trying to build new monuments to
the idea that people were gonna line up
and put quarters into a machine to have
a five-minute entertainment experience
now it is not so paradoxical that today
in 2018 this same mentality Sega had
that from my opinion is one of the two
big things that destroyed the company
makes their their software and their
hardware more collectible and more
interesting especially to adults today
because the arcade experience was all
about five minutes of entertainment
it was vote very brief very shallow
pick-up-and-play entertainment and I've
got to say this above all else there's a
difference between something being false
and something being misleading Sega was
very successful in the arcades from
their earliest period of activity as a
video game producer the problem is they
let that success mislead them and
Nintendo did not Nintendo had a crucial
outstanding success in arcades with
Donkey Kong the original Donkey Kong and
Donkey Kong jr. Nintendo had a crucial
out stand
success in the arcades with the original
punch-out an arcade game that used two
TV screens is quite innovative and the
whole control system everything they did
not let that become their obsession and
driving and guiding force a Nintendo
their corporate culture or their
creative process it really is what it's
like you're thinking about it like
cinema or writing books or like pulp
fiction or something um
did not become centered around the
arcade and at sega their mentality
remained steadfastly obsessed with the
arcade to such an extent that when they
had a little bit of success with
something like Wonder Boy in monster
land
Wonder Boy in Monster land was an action
role-playing game that involved
collecting coins and upgrading your
armor and getting better boots so you
could jump higher what do they do is oh
we have to make this into an arcade game
and it's the most surreal ridiculous
Arcadian the idea that people will stand
there and insert quarters stand there
for like three hours or something
doing this repetitive crap that genre
the action role-playing in the action
RPG became huge did Nintendo try to take
Selda and make it into an arcade game
that's as absurd as that would be be as
absurd as as Nintendo saying hey we've
got a hit with Zelda now we've got to
make Zelda into an arcade game or even I
mean really what's going on at Sega is
not even inventing Zelda because you're
so obsessed with only making things that
work in the arcade formula and Sega
always had enough success for this to
continue to work their perception of the
company and what it should be and what
children's entertainment should be what
home entertainment should be what video
games should be golden axe big success
getting into the the Saturn era they
made a game that spun off from the die
hard movies even though the die hard
movies were already way in the past in
Japan was called dynamite Decca dynamite
detective but in North America was
called die hard trilogy big success in
the arcade everything about that even
the hardware it was running on all in
the saturn period what's their idea of
success oh Timecop what what's the
concept of
cop is fun for 30 seconds five minutes
that's the kind of experience I've got
even the name is laughable right what
what did they do to launch time oh we've
got to create hardware for the arcade
that's as close as possible to the
Saturn so that we can have an arcade
perfect game world or the Saturn I was a
journalist of the time I think I was
given time koffice as a review copy
maybe I'm miss remember I think they
gave me time cough is one of their star
products that was the plan what are they
gonna do with diehard diehard trilogy
this this game also known as dynamic
where they do again they developed this
arcade hardware that was cold
sorry it's named after one of the moons
of Saturn so there's the Saturn and then
the other hardware is Titan that's it
Titan is one of the moons of Saturn they
developed hardware in tandem with the
whole hardware so that they could then
advertise to you we have an RV arcade
perfect conversion oh this sorry this
shows how hilarious mysteriously
misconceived it is to try to launch and
promote home software through arcade
software and it means that you're
inevitably producing incredibly shallow
stupid video games that are fun and
eye-catching for 30 seconds or five
minutes and this is not what was
happening at Nintendo this is not what
was happening at Sony or Microsoft the
one real parallel that nobody at Sega
would want to think about was the rise
and success and then eventual failure of
the Neo Geo so Neo Geo AES Neo Geo
arcade and home system Neo Geo was built
on that concept that what people really
wanted was an arcade perfect experience
at home and again today if you're an
adult maybe you find that stuff very
collectible if you spent over 300
dollars so you can sit down and play a
game like Neo Geo bowling that's fun and
well animated eye-catching for 30
seconds or five minutes this is a
business model that's never gonna work
and whatever again success can be
misleading it would be false to
say that the NeoGeo was a total flop
even though it was incredibly expensive
and for the amount of money you spent it
offered you a really low-quality really
shallow arcade-like experience that was
they tried to do
seiga had enough success during the
16-bit era that it sustained their faith
in this arcade centered business model
which had been everything they've been
doing since they they started as a
company and then again right through the
Saturn period there there are some
infamous quotations from the guy who was
then the CEO of Sega of America where he
actually said no more 2d games no more
role-playing games talked about all
those genres he didn't want the system
at all it was this total overweening
focus on on games like the ones I've
mentioned that were hits in the arcade
however fleetingly and thinking that was
gonna drive adoption of this home system
so what I've just said this is kind of
my first point I'm definitely not the
only person who picked up on this I
might be one of the few people who was
employed as a employed as a journalist
at that time and who saw inside yeah
again not look at any it's not deep I
mean it was very open none of this was
hidden this was overtly pits this model
they're preparing you so again it's not
like I'm telling you some secret it's
like if you were alive at the time when
coca-cola had a certain marketing
strategy this is what the whole company
was doing and they were about to be
wiped out they were about to be
destroyed by Sony who had none of these
misconceptions and none of these
hang-ups and didn't have this approach
to to hardware or software and they also
were of course being beaten by Nintendo
who probably understood several
different things better than Sega did
including the fact that what they were
doing fundamentally was more like a
children's storybook Alton what is the
Legend of Zelda ultimately right so the
only thing I'd say here briefly is of
course there are counter examples but
the counter examples within Sega I think
really proved the point okay so somebody
might comment below this video oh well
you know you say that but Sega had the
fantasy star Siri
so if you guys don't know fantasy start
someone might say it's similar to Legend
of Zelda very broadly very loosely okay
what did Sega do with with fantasy star
the original fantasy star fantasy r1 was
this huge hit this huge innovation
everyone got excited about it they did
not feature it or put resources into it
or make a cartoon for it the way
Nintendo did with Zelda right because
that was not their focus or interest as
as a company their interest was totally
on the arcade and arcade like game
experiences so again even the exceptions
prove the rule some other company who
had a hit with fantasy star would have
said Wow here's something we need to be
doing you're selling we need to focus on
making a game that has a story in text
form and takes hours to play it's like
it's for children you know when it
combines these elements there's a little
bit of strategy and exploration or
whatever again very very broadly similar
to Zelda they're not that similar
doesn't matter and develop the company
in that direction and that's not what
they did so again where is the fantasy
star cartoon where the signs that are at
a corporate level or even just at a
creative level that was what they saw as
the future of the company they're not
there so yes you can you can pick and
choose examples that are a
counter-argument but I think in broad
brushstrokes that was what
differentiated Sega from all of its
competition
Nintendo Microsoft and Sony and that was
their short term success and their long
term failure they're doomed okay
the second point of one to make is this
Sega and and again part of this I've
never heard anyone say before in the
internet from the creation of the
sg-1000 the sg-1000 was the precursor to
the Sega Master System Sega thought that
the key to their success was being first
coming out before Nintendo and have a
new hardware maybe every two years like
as often as possible bringing out new
hardware and anyone today anyone just
from a consumer perspective would say
that's insane
how can you expect parents to buy a new
video game system every two years that's
completely ridiculous this so that part
other people Adela said here's her thing
nobody's said before the most ridiculous
thing of all is how can you expect
third-party software developers to learn
how to program from scratch to go back
to assembly code and make new tools and
new libraries and go back basically like
going back to college and learn how to
program a video game again every two
years and hear me out on this it's a
little bit more sophisticated might
think that's the most crucial problem
and they didn't experience it with their
first several transitions sg-1000 comes
out successful but of course not
successful enough within just a couple
of years the mark 2 and the mark 3 come
out mark 3 is a significant
technological improvement on the sg-1000
but fundamentally the same processor
fundamentally the same architecture
programmers could take code they did for
the SP 1000 and rehash it rework it to
run on the mark 3 no problem mark 3 is
succeeded by Sega Master System so even
though there's a discontinuity even
though from the consumer perspective
it's like whoa this company is asking me
to buy new hardware ever every year
every two years all the time to bring up
new hardware at least from the software
designers perspective from the
programmers perspective they're able to
build up the same skills continually and
apply it to the evolving hardware
because the hardware it is getting
better we can have more colors on screen
and more sprites and more animation but
it's still similar from an insider's
perspective this actually continued to a
greater extent than most people
appreciate in the transition from 8-bit
to 16-bit the Sega Genesis was in many
many ways just an upgraded Sega Master
System and they tried to conceal this it
doesn't actually require any kind of
adapter to run 8-bit Master System
titles it's completely continuous on
such a
we're level in terms of the architecture
the cartridges don't fit but for example
fantasy star they put it a collectible
edition which was the master system
phantasy star cartridge inside the
plastic housing of a Genesis cartridge
and it would run on the Sega Genesis
with no emulator no adapter this is
totally different from a situation like
the so-called super Gameboy a super
Gameboy has its own computer it has a
lot of hardware basically a super
Gameboy has all of the hardware you'd
have inside a Gameboy then feeding the
data to a Super Nintendo that's much
more than just an adapter or software
emulation that's hardware there's
nothing like that so again people who
had put years of work into learning how
to make a very crude baseball game on
the sg-1000 and on the Sega Master
System could now take that and directly
recycle their efforts programming a
baseball game in 16-bit for the Sega
Genesis right so it was new hardware
coming out consumers had to pay more but
most of the creative staff were able to
recycle a lot of their assets take their
job training and experience and apply it
again guess when this broke down this
continuity of hardware and and
programming skills completely and
utterly broke down with the transition
to the Sega Saturn and that's the
universal complaint at third third party
software houses and so on was Sega
Saturn was incredibly tough to code for
if you didn't know assembly code if you
weren't able to work from scratch and
put a ton of time and resources into
retraining all of your staff Sega didn't
provide you with the libraries you
needed software libraries it was just a
huge investment of time and money to
learn how to code for this thing you so
there was a total discontinuity from the
the creative people's point of view and
the companies that were able to do it
were companies like Capcom Capcom just
had the depth of resources and skills
and they devoted enough people to
developing everything
needed to be able to produce great
software for the sake of center but you
see sega didn't change their attitude
they were into this really tight cycle
of obsolescence so you guys already
another story five minutes after the
genesis comes out they're working on the
Sega CD also known as the mega CD could
have been great you'd need to support it
for years to get software really taking
advantage of what Sega CD had to offer
never happened five minutes after that
bringing out the Sega 32x a 32-bit
system building on a lot of the same
base ease could have could have been
okay no gonna say it could have been
great never really developed it was
undercut software designers software
houses that put resources into it felt
cheated had the ground could have come
out of them five minutes after that Sega
Saturn comes out so the rate of systems
going obsolete they kept up at this
breakneck pace which they thought was
part of their success in the earlier
transition from sg-1000 to Master System
Master System to the 16-bit era Sega
Genesis and Mega Drive but again the
same principle it's it's not something
that's false
it's something that's true but
misleading they felt this as part of
their success ultimately it discord
destroyed them as a company and then
obviously when they made the next
transition from Saturn to the Dreamcast
nobody was with them anymore
they'd alienated exactly all the people
they need to support them and they knew
that this is a well-known fact
Sega originally was going to release the
Dreamcast under a new company where the
name would just be Dreamcast they were
actually gonna remove the name Sega
there were many companies that ended up
publicly denouncing them and breaking
from them when the Sega Saturn at some
point during the sega saturn's life not
necessarily at the beginning when it
launched at some point they got fed up
and walked one of those i remember
happened well it was a video game
journalist and the other thing you guys
might be forgetting is sega relied
really heavily on a software house
called Electronic Arts and Electronic
Arts already made it clear they were
sick and tired of Sega's crap when they
jumped ship
to support the 3do the panasonic 3do
panasonic 3do failed yeah my
girlfriend's never heard of the
panasonic 3do yeah I do not have a
panasonic 3do to hold office a prop
that's for damn sure
right well they've been there so around
they're still massively successful and
no but they mean you have a bunch of
games here or for Sega that are
Electronic Arts yeah they were very very
successful sufferers for the 16-bit era
and and continuing after that already
made it very clear that even Electronic
Arts who'd been you know a crucial part
of Sega's success they had run out of
patience at this company they were
looking to jump ship to anyone else who
was who was offering a better
alternative and jump ship they did okay
stay cool guys again maybe a bit of a
downer but I mean that is why from my
perspective you know Sega failed I have
many videos on this channel by the way I
about playlist um where I really do
regret the role that video games had my
own life and I can remember the
different points in my youth when I kind
of broke away from video games and
wanted to have a more meaningful life
and in a lot of ways the period of my
life when I was involved in video games
journalist I was already too old to
untie Roenick Lee Love or enjoy video
games video games were already something
I really kind of looked down my nose at
as a snob I mean it was interesting and
it was interesting being swept up in
this particular moment in the history of
the video game industry where there was
intense competition and nobody knew what
was gonna happen next I mean nobody knew
what the future of Sega and Nintendo
were and what happened next was sony
sony wiped them all off the map nobody
really saw that coming I think nobody
thought that you know what company that
makes it's kinda hard work but this is
what I say my other videos and I'd like
to talk about this more in future videos
too because it's interesting I mean I
reflect on really briefly I remember at
one point in high school I totally
stopped playing video games and then I
made this new friend and he became a
really close friend of mine for several
years he was really dragging me back
into playing video game because he was
still into it and I was completely done
with it but I think we all go through
those kinds of things where you have
some connection in your life for some
friend who you know is still excited
about
stuff and you feel it's childish and
you've given up on it and then again
it's bizarre but I ended up being pulled
back into video games by being paid and
it was really very generous I was paid
very when you're being paid to play
video games suddenly get interested but
I mean the sense in which video games
are a waste of time I think it is worth
reflecting also you know do they have to
be you know I've said this since forever
on the Internet you know there's no
reason why put it this way there's no
reason why an article on a website has
to be worse than an article in a
magazine in a newspaper in a journal or
even a Peer Review Journal I'm cynical
as hell about peer review topic for
another video by the same token there's
no real reason why literature especially
we're talking about children's
literature which doesn't have that many
words there's no reason why a children's
story book has it should be worse on a
cartridge as opposed to being worse on a
DVD like a movie as opposed to being
worse in the in book format one medium
or another doesn't really define this
however if you were to ask over a 50
year period why are comic books so much
worse than other forms of literature why
is that comic books are worse than you
know even mainstream pop literature like
yeah okay my girlfriend says Harry
Potter I was gonna say detective stories
or something you know things that are in
book format but are very much just
trying to be mass love your Sherlock
Holmes this is a good example Sherlock
Holmes are originally published in
newspapers and then publishing books why
is Sherlock Holmes a step up from Batman
spider-man in the x-men well one of the
most fundamental reasons is scheduling
in the organization of labor right one
of the most fundamental reasons is that
videogames like comic books were
produced by heartless corporations who
wanted all the work done in two months
you know okay you got the script written
okay you have to tell Tuesday to write
the script okay they're doing character
design character designs going to be
done in two weeks and then we got a code
and then we got a music composer is
doing this all this stuff was done on
site
a tight schedule with no sincere
interests in the final product and the
focus as they say something as subtle as
the focus on arcade games as opposed to
other kinds of immersive experiences as
opposed to educational content as
opposed to just sincerely trying to
provide children's entertainment as
opposed to thinking of yourself as a
furniture manufacturer that just happens
to also make video games whatever those
corporate perspectives may be the
corporation that owns you know the
hardware and software and that sets the
schedule and shapes the creative process
that utterly determines the quality and
content of the quality of the ensuing
content and in a profound way so even
though x-men oh time over like a 30 year
period or fifty or third x-men is very
different from Batman different company
and just different writers different
artists but nevertheless they were both
produced by this kind of grinding
soulless anti creative for-profit
corporate structure and both the success
and failure of sega reflects that kind
of meta analysis if you like the higher
levels of the organization of labor in
the creative process and sadly the
meaninglessness of so many hours of my
own childhood reflects this also because
the stuff I was reading like Batman was
produced in five minutes on schedule to
produce a monthly comic for profit with
as many spin-offs from merchandising as
possible and tie-ins the TV shows movies
this stuff was not produced even like
Sherlock Holmes was produced at that
level of artistry and creativity this
stuff was not produced you know in the
same way that even george RR martin
writes Game of Thrones or something it
this was not produced in an educational
way or artistic way it was produced in
this kind of horrible for Broadway
so I mean many many hours lost reading
schlock comic books and you know video
games regardless of the format of the
particular corporation yeah ultimately
sadly this was a medium or for my
generation whatever potential they had
to be a positive part of my childhood I
think was undercut by the core
for conditions that produce with few
exceptions I think I should do a
follow-up video on my most my most
positive experiences with video games
growing up was there anything good or
was it all just a complete waste of my
time
then I now look back on as a as a
crippling source of regret in in how I
grew up in in modern Western Canada
because I think I think there probably
are stay tuned